I set
up a consultant service, labor consultant, and
went to the steamship companies and got them to
retain me.
I was just getting going good when the government
took over their ships. And this was in 1941, and Joe
Curran asked me to come to Washington as the
legislative representative for the unions,
maritime unions of the CIO, CIO Maritime
Committee. So that's what I did. I came to
Washington then. So he appointed you after he had
become a vice president of the CIO? Yeah, he was the
vice president of the CIO then, but
he didn't appoint me as vice president of the CIO.
He appointed me as chairman of the CIO Maritime
Committee.
So I came to Washington, and that's my life. spent
the rest of my life in Washington. I stayed with the
CIO Maritime Committee, and in 1950,
I guess it was, I set up what was known as the Labor
Management Maritime Committee, because
I realized that unless we can get the industry
working together, that is, labor and management.
We were never going to get anywhere. So I set up that
committee, and that's why you see it here on the
present time, I think.
And then, of course, I retired.
And I'm busier now than I was before I retired. Did
you know a Jerry King? Jerry King? Yes. Knew him
quite well. Uh, what do you think his stand was? His
stand was? What faction did he fit into? He fitted
into the shipowner faction. Any particular
shipowning company that might have controlled
him, in your opinion? Uh, I don't know which one,
but I do know that he was controlled by the ship
companies. When I was told that, I said I don't want
to know any of the details. If I know any of the
details, I'll go tell the NMU. So don't tell me. So
did you have any recollections on the Mariners
Club? Not really, except they were trying to take
over control of the Union and really put it under
the control of the companies. During the war
years, you spent your time here in Washington.
Yeah.
During this time, in your opinion, did the
relationship of the government toward the Union,
or the opinion of the government toward the NMU,
change any? Oh, yes. Can you date that to any
particular time, or what do you think it was, how
would you describe it before the war started and
then during and after? I would say from the time
that the government took over the ships their
attitude towards the Union started to change
because they found that the Union was more
cooperative than ship owners. Why do you think
this was? Why the Union all of a sudden become
cooperative? Well, I think it was because the
companies were interested in the money angle and
not so much in the war angle and the Union was more
interested in the war angle. The Union was
interested in protecting the ships and winning
the war.
What do you think Admiral Emery Lanz, what was his
opinion of the NMU and of Joe Kern?
Well, I would say that Emery Lanz, like most of the
military men at that time were anti-union.
But he was smart enough to recognize that he was
going to have to have the help of the Union if he was
going to do his job.
So, while he didn't buy everything that they said,
he did cooperate with them and seek their
cooperation.
And he wouldn't hesitate to to read the right act of
them just like he would read the right act of the
president if the occasion presented itself.
What about... He was a strong personality, no
question about it, and to show his interest in the
seamen during the war, seamen were not permitted
in the clubs of USO
and He was trying to find a way to solve that. So his
wife suggested to him that maybe they ought to set
up their own clubs for the seamen. He said, that's a
great idea. I'll take it to the president. He took
it to the president. The president said, I'm all in
favor of it. But don't let it be a government
organization. Have it a private organization.
Because if it's not a private organization, it'll
never accomplish its purpose. If it's a
government organization, it won't. Were you
active in presenting the unions side at the
December 19, 1941 meeting between the ship
owners, the at that time Maritime Commission, and
the labor unions and the statement of principles?
Yes, I was. And what was your input into that?
Well, I wrote the final statement. Why wasn't the
union's original proposals for a tripartite
board acceptable instead of the
mediating board that came out?
Why wasn't the NMU able to get this point of view
accepted?
I don't remember the details, but I can tell you at
the time, and
not just at that time, but ever since,
it has been my opinion that government is about the
worst thing that can happen to any industry, labor
or management. Their intervention into
Business world or labor world is the worst thing
that can happen for the business or the union or the
country. And if you look at where we are now, you'll
find that the intervention of government is what
has put us where we are today. If we had a government
all formed by the people, fine. But we don't. We
have a government all formed by the banking
industry. They control the banks. They nominate
the president. They elect the president. They
tell the president what to do. And most
congressmen, they don't tell what to do. They do it
without being told. What was your relationship
with the WSA, the warship administration? Well, I
was on the Marine panel.
And I was active in lobbying. the war shipping
panel itself, and I was very active with Senator
Truman and his committee. I forget the name of the
committee.
War Production Committee. I don't remember now,
but he was, he headed up a committee that was the
most influential committee on war matters and on
shipping matters at the time. And I was very
active, of course, with the staff of that
committee. I was a lobbyist. I tried to do my job.
What about your relationship and the union's
relationship with the RMO, Recruitment and
Manning? The Recruitment and Manning
Organization, RMO.
I don't remember it. It was headed by McCauley?
Who? McCauley. Captain McCullen?
Oh, he was one of the commissioners.
In particular, what I'm getting at is the
agreement that was reached in 42. Well, first of
all, the talk of the Merchant Marine being
nationalized and placed under the Navy, and then
the subsequent agreements that come out between
Lundberg and the WSA, and then later on the NMU and
their relationship, their agreement with
Admiral Land. I don't remember much of the
details, but I do remember McCauley and we being
very close. We felt that McCauley was
the one commissioner at that time who we could rely
upon to be fair. During the war time, was there any
fear by the NMU that the government and or the
operators were attempting in some way to destroy
the hiring hall? Oh, yes. And if so, what would the
union have been prepared to do? More or less, would
they have, or did Cheran and the NMU ever consider
the possibility of dropping the no-strike
pledge?
If they had gotten down to really destroying the
Union Hall, there would have been a strike threat.
There would have been a strike, not just a strike
threat. There would have been a strike. No
question about it. Had there ever been any, were
there ever any contingency plans made by the Union
for a strike during? No. Would you consider this
then a type of act of faith as far as the Union goes in
unilaterally declaring this no-strike pledge
the day after Pearl Harbor? Was this tactically
done by Curran, or was it strictly good faith, or
was he hoping for something down the road to come
out of this? Or was it just a pure act of patriotism?
Well, he... The Union was 100% for winning the war,
so the Union was all behind all efforts to win that
war, no question about it. Up to but not including
losing the hiring hall. Well, this is pure
guesswork on my part, but I don't think they would
have permitted the hiring hall to be destroyed.
because they knew if that were destroyed, they
wouldn't have a Union after the war.
Who was influential in talking Joe into shipping
out his Navy during the war to check the seamen's
conditions abroad? Nobody. That was just his own?
That was his own idea. He wanted to find out what
could be done to improve the war effort. And that's
what he wanted to do. He wanted to go see firsthand
what was happening then. The Union begins
developing a post-war program around 1943. How
much input did you have into this? Probably all of
it. Would you like to go into more detail? Well,
No one
in the NMU was thinking of anything after the war.
As a matter of fact, there literally has never been
any planning in the NMU. It went along from day to
day. And I told Joe, there's about time we started
to think of some of those things. About when was it
approximately?
I'd say probably about 43 or somewhere in there.
So I got to talking about it, and
Harry Bridges happened to come to town while Joe
happened to be in town. I forget what it may have
been, a committee meeting. I don't know. And I told
him some of my ideas, some of the things that I
thought we ought to be talking about. And I said,
for example, I think
one of the most important things that could be done
right now in terms of war has nothing to do with the
future, but actually winning the war is
containerization.
So we got to talking about that, and Harry was
interested, and he said, will you prepare me a
paper on it? So I prepared him a paper, and that was
the beginning of the container ships, really. And
I went to First time I was in New York, I went to see
Franklin, who was United States lines, and Emmett
McCormick of more McCormick lines, and told them
that I thought they ought to be thinking in terms of
building container ships, because this is where
cargo is going to end up in the commerce of the
world. Neither one of them could see it. No
business. And then when I developed the program, I
told them that the... I went back to these same two
guys in connection with one thing, and that was
the, you know, shipping after the war. Because
this time I was working on, you know, what the
program was going to be like after the war. And I got
into... whole question of how many ships we were
going to have, and that meant bottom dropping out
of shipping as far as companies and unions were
concerned.
And Joe wouldn't believe me at all. He said, it just
isn't going to happen. We're going to continue
having a good merchant marine. And I depicted a cut
in ships. I said, you've got to think of other
things. Well, before I get to that, I started to
tell about this these two guys, two main guys
really in shipping at that time. And I suggested to
them that in addition, I said, you couldn't see
light on this question of
container ships. But I said, the big need for the
United States after the war is going to be bulk
ships. tankers and ore carriers.
I said, why don't you give some thought to
investing money in either one of these? Because
there's money to be made in it. So they said, well,
now, bulk carriers is an idea. Let's explore that.
What's your idea on the bulk carriers? So I told
them the kind of ships I was thinking of, 100,000
ton ships. never heard of, you know. You were
talking the big ships at that time was 15,000 tons.
That was a big ship. They couldn't see ships of that
size. I said, well, you go talk to the people that
have to import this ore, and see what they think of
it. And then I projected to them my idea of where we
were headed, both in terms of petroleum and ore
products. And I told them that our supplies in the
United States just weren't going to be adequate. I
said, by the year 2000, we'll be importing at least
eighty to ninety percent of ore and oil. And this
they couldn't see. None of these people had any
visions at all. I don't understand why they
couldn't see what was happening. But I said, well,
I don't have the statistics on this, but I'm going
to get them. I'll get them together, and I'll show
them to you. And I said, you just have to realize
that with the kind of economy that we have and the
growth that is essential to meet the minimum
employment needs of this nation are just going to
have to skyrocket. You just won't be able to
believe it. But they said, well, I've How in the
world do you think we can get in the ore trade?
I said, first of all, you have to get off your ass and
stop thinking of subsidies. Because at one time or
another, the government's going to cut out these
subsidies, and they ought to cut them out. The only
reason for a subsidy, really, is for national
defense and for protecting our commerce. Have
enough ships to protect their commerce against
high rates from foreign ships. That's the only two
reasons you can give for it, and you know it. I said,
this business of living off of Uncle Sam is just a
lazy man's way, and you ought to start using your
head on these things. I said, if I were a ship owner,
I would go to U.S. Steel, I would go to American
Aluminum, and organizations like this that are
going to be importing bulk ores, and I would go to
Companies like Standard Oil of New Jersey, Shell,
who charter at least half of their ships and work
out some deals with them. Well, that sounds like a
good idea. Never got off the ground, but it was a
good idea. But
really,
the shipping industry in the United States was,
you know, built on subsidies. That's all they
could think of. You can't compete with
foreigners. And I kept telling them they were
crazy. They just had to get more production. You
had to get bigger ships, like any other industry.
If you're going to create wealth, you've got to
create production. If you're going to create
production, you've got to have labor
interchange. The whole system is built on
interchange of labor. It started off with the
shoemaker making shoes for the hat maker, and the
hat maker hats for the shoemakers, and the baker,
baker for both of them. And that's the way it
started off. But you're not living in that kind of
economy anymore. You're living in a very
fast-growing economy that's going to be
monetized, and you have to be thinking in those
terms.
And I said, the people who are going to be
successful are going to be the people who design
and operate the most efficient ships. And the most
efficient ships is going to be a ship that's going
to carry 10 times as much cargo as you carry now with
the same crew or maybe even less crew. I said, for
example, you know you can operate a ship without
any crew on it at all. But think in terms of it as the
same crew for the larger ship. Well, they thought
on it, but never did anything about it. Other
entrepreneurs came along and did the job for them.
But specifically for the NMU, I showed them what
their membership was going to shrink from. I
forget what it was right after the war. It seems to
me it was about 125,000 members. And I told them
that that job program would probably shrink to
deep sea of between 10 and 20,000 people. I said,
you just have to think in those terms. That means
you've got to get out and organize other people.
The natural thing that I think you should do is to
organize the people who work in the steamship
companies. That's a natural for you. Then I gave
them a few other ideas of associated industries
that would seem to make some sense. to people that I
knew were absolutely opposed to anything except
semen in their union. Was Karen receptor to the
United? He was not. Absolutely not. Nothing but
semen in his union. And he went on like that almost
till the end.
And it was just sheer necessity of staying alive
that finally convinced him that he had to do
something else. And then they started organizing
other people.
Who was the driving force behind developing the
PAC movement during the war, the Political Action
Committee?
Whose brainchild was that?
Oh, what's his name? head of the garment workers,
Goldman. Lewis, was it Lewis Goldman? Well,
specifically in the NMU, who was receptive to the
idea?
I'm not really sure.
I think it was really an outgrowth of what was
happening. I think we all realized that the
Washington scene had to be covered. That there
were about, as I recall, 23
agencies in Washington who had something to do
with the maritime industry. And I don't think this
was anyone's idea specifically that you know, of
coming forth with the idea that this had to be done.
I think it was just a natural outgrowth of the fact
that we were dealing with these things all the time
and this had to be done. And I know that this idea
finally took head. The NMU was the first one to put
someone down here. I don't remember what his name
was now, but they had a representative down here.
before, I think, even before the CIO was formed.
But when the CIO was formed,
Joe suggested that everyone get together and set
up this committee and have representation here at
the Washington level, and that's what was done.
That was when the CIO Maritime Committee was set
up. So I don't think it was anyone's idea as such,
just the need was there and had to be met. Was this
acceptable also to the left-wing or the communist
factions? Yes, it was. They understood the need
also? Yeah. Probably, if you take it back, the
Copland book was probably the bellwether of the
whole thing. I'm really not sure.
I don't remember anyone coming up with the idea
that, you know, we've got to have representation
in Washington. I think everyone knew we had to have
representation in Washington because of the
situation that existed.
Going back to the Curran-Bridges relationship,
it seems to me that we even put in the NMU
Constitution representation in Washington.
I think we did, as a matter of fact. But you know,
we'd been through the NRA already, and all of
Roosevelt's so-called recovery programs by
then.
As far as Curran and Bridges goes, and their
relationship,
could you pick up on that particularly, say, from
the beginning of the war on? Their relationship
was purely a relationship of mutual help for each
other's union. Neither one of them really had any
use for the other one. Personally, I'm talking on a
personal basis now. But they both recognized that
they needed help from each other. And to get help
from each other, they ought to help each other. And
it was just, again, the awareness of the of the
needs. Who was the person within the NMU then that
started the idea of the Union backing Bridges so
strongly in his deportation hearings,
particularly in 39 and the deportation hearings
in 42, to the point where they issued fighting
stamps? I think this was an ILA program that was
started on the West Coast and got the support of the
And Bridges brought it to the CIO Maritime
Committee, too, of course. And there just wasn't
any question. There was, at that time, in the
movement,
there was never any question but what one union was
going to support the other maritime union. On any
issue. Didn't make any difference what the issue
was. They just supported it. If one union put up a
picket line, another one is not going to touch it.
There was just that much solidarity and that much
understanding of the need to help each other at
that time. Even if it meant crossing ideological
boundaries?
Well, I think each one of these, had their
ideological
reasons also, because they were, if you're
building a base, you know, for your party guys on
anything you do, if you're strengthening the
organization, you're building a party base. I can
remember a meeting that we had here in Washington
where we were talking about the 40-hour week. This
grew out of my suggestion to the seamen that they
ought to start thinking in terms of more
employment aboard the ships. When would this be,
after the war? Beg your pardon? When would this be?
This was after the war. It may have not been after
the war. It may have been just before the war ended.
I'm not just sure of the timing on it. But anyway, I
came up with the idea that we ought to think in terms
of putting more people on the ship. And doing this,
think of a 40-hour week.
And I was thinking purely of the employment
situation, because it was perfectly obvious to me
that we were going to have a tremendous drop in the
employment of merchant seamen.
I guess this would have had to have been after the
general who became Secretary of State, Marshall,
after the Marshall Plan. It became perfectly
obvious to me that we were going to not only rebuild
the European allies industries, but we were going
to rebuild their merchant marines, too. If we
rebuild their merchant marine, that meant that
our shipping was going to drop down from about
sixty percent to, I was figuring ten percent as the
lowest, but of course it didn't hold there.
Do you remember Joe's pamphlet, Porkchops and
Politics? Did he write that, or was it
ghostwritten? Joe wrote everything that his name
was on. Well, I'll take that back now. There's some
of these books that were written that his name was
put on them. But for example, his column in the
paper, he literally wrote every one of those
himself. And the pork chops thing, I'm sure he
wrote too. But it was edited, of course, after he
wrote it. And his column was frequently edited.
Not all the time, but frequently edited. If he had a
good editor, it was edited. If he didn't have a good
editor, it wasn't edited. I know when Bernie
Raskin was editor, he edited all of Joe's columns.
So I don't remember the details on pork chops, but I
feel sure it was edited, but I also feel sure that
Joe wrote it.
Joe grew in the job. be a very capable person.
I would say really that there were, and
this is definitely off the record.
Concerning the development during the war of the
Committee for Maritime Unity, what was your stand
as far as this goes and the NMU?
I think at that time the only role I had in it was as a
functionary trying to come up with ideas and ways
to try to bring it forward and to make it work.
I think originally I told Joe that I never had any
hopes for it. I told him, I said, I think you are just
barking up the tree if you think you'll ever get
Lundberg, really. to
honestly participate in maritime unity where you
or
Bridges are concerned. As far as this maritime
committee, unity committee goes, when or how was
it that Joe began to perceive that he and Bridges
were coming to a loggerhead? Was this, again, an
ego clash,
or was there something else that started to put the
wedge between Kieran and Bridges? Because
apparently they had a very close, at least
working, relationship for quite a while. Yes,
they did have a close relationship.
I think the thing that did that was a fellow with the
name of Goldblatt, who became
secretary-treasurer of the ILWU and became a...
What do you call it? Well, he was looking for
Bridges' job.
And I think that he drove a wedge between Bridges
and Curran. I think that's, that's the really
where this started. He also was a party
functionary.
not just a member, he was a party functionary. I
don't know what function he had now, I don't
remember. But he perceived Joe as being too strong
a person for the party to take on, and him
personally to take on, and he couldn't perceive of
anyone in the maritime industry being more
important than he was. And this was another case of
a a person of small stature
not being able to work with someone, physically
I'm talking about, physically larger stature.
And that literally was that he was that kind of a
person. When was it that Joe began to perceive that
he was going to have to have some type of a clash with
the communist elements within the Union? And I'm
trying to think of the incident.
There was something. I know what it was, the
Standard Oil strike. This was the key to that. It
was early as 39. Yeah, that was the key to it. You
think had there been no World War II that there
might have been a clash earlier in 45? Probably.
probably. But the war set that aside, because he
finally perceived, recognized that this was a
hell of a mistake that he let the muckery into. Why
did the, during this time then, did Joe allow the
press to continue branding him as a communist?
Well, how was he going to keep from being branded.
They branded me as a communist, too. So he had no
input or no inside contacts with the press, did he?
Sure you have any contacts, but those contacts
don't control the policy of the press, just like
they don't control it today.
The powers that run the country control the press,
and they'll print what they want to print. For
example, you don't find them printing that the
Federal Reserve
steals the money from the people of the United
States, do you? You don't find them printing that
the activities of the Federal Reserve cause the
depressions and the unemployment?
They're responsible for the inflation. You don't
find that in the press. When Curran finally
decided that he had to take on the Communist
elements, was this a personal decision, or did he
have other people counseling him? And if so, when
did he start to work out a strategy? Well, all along
the line, he had a strategy
to not let the Communist Party program become a
program of the Union. As I've mentioned earlier,
the program was to serve the Union, serve the
members, and not the Communist Party. Now, as long
as the Communist Party was willing to work for
those programs which served the Union and let that
serve themselves, there was no problem. It's only
when you come to a point where their activities
were inimical to the best interest of the
membership of the Union. When do you think, then,
that the working relationship between Kirillin
and the communists began to break down?
There was some incident just before this
convention that you referred to,
and Joe asked me if I would go to the Communist Party
leadership and explain to them what I perceived
the Communists were trying to do to the Union. And
this was after Lannan, you mentioned Lannan, Al
Lannan, That's after he became the chief
waterfront guy. So I had, I went, literally went
down to the communist headquarters, I think they
were on 14th Street, I'm not sure now, and talked
with someone there that I had known previously, a
woman, I don't remember her name. She was a big wig
in the party. and told her and another guy who was
also big with what was going on in the Union. These
guys were really trying to control the Union for
their own personal interest as well as for the
party's interest and not the seamen's interest.
Of course, I recognized their goal was pure party.
But I told her, I said, they're not going to control
it. That way, if they're going to part with Joe on
the issue of doing what's best for the seamen,
they're going to lose. And you'd better make up
your mind to this. But I don't remember now what the
issues were, but this happened. And this is while I
was working with Standard Oil of New Jersey. So it
was before I came to Washington.
Anyway, the party said, well, now who we're going
to believe? Our, uh, Lannan and Blackie Mars and
Jack Lawrence and so on and so on tell us this, and
you and Joe telling us something else. Well, I
said,
uh, Joe doesn't want a fight with the Communist
Party because he thinks it will hurt the Union. And
if it hurts the Union, it's going to hurt the
seamen. And that's the primary thing he's
interested in. That's the primary thing the
Union's interested in, the only thing the Union is
interested in. He said, now, if you want to try to
control the Union for the interests of the
Communist Party, in the face of that, that's your
decision to make. And they said, well, we'll
discuss it with them some more. But I want to tell
you frankly, Hoyt, that we have no hopes of
changing the situation. So they wanted the
party's leaders wanted to continue to... They
wanted the party at that point to take over the
Union, I think. This would have been... I'm not
sure of the year. During the war? Beg your pardon?
During the war?
Yes, it would have to be...
I just don't remember. This may have been after the
war. I really don't remember. Was there
anybody... No, this would have had to have been
during the war, definitely during the war. Was
there anybody advising Kieran to begin purging
the communists? Well, he was always being advised
to do this. Anybody specifically, beside
yourself? No, I didn't advise him to purge, no. No,
I didn't advise him to purge. Matter of fact, I
didn't think he could. Was there anybody inside
the government who might have been...
Not that I know of. Not that I know of. I don't think
anyone was really advising him to purge the Union.
I know that people were from time to time, as they
did with me, raised the question of when is he going
to get rid of that... communist control in the
Union. I said, well, how would you, wouldn't
anyone raise it with me? I'd ask them, how would you
go about it? I said, I've thought of this many
times. And I've always come to the conclusion that
I didn't think he could do it. And I didn't because
there were more of them than there were of him. And I
would say that 90% of the officers of the Union were
communists. I know at one time that all of the
officers of the national office were communists
except Joe, and certainly most of the port agents.
So in your opinion then, when the showdown began in
1945, it was the communists felt that they were
strong enough to purge Joe and not vice versa?
That's right. So they made the first move, not Joe?
They made the first move. And he acted defensively
then? That's
right. That started out trying to build himself up
in the Union
without giving
Bridges any idea that he was going to replace
Bridges.
And I think he simply perceived that one of the ways
to do this was to create a real split between Curran
and Bridges.